This illustration to the Akbarnama (Book of Akbar) is the right side of a double-page composition.
The entire composition depicts a ceremonial hunt that took place near Lahore, in present-day north-east Pakistan, in 1567.
Here, Akbar is seen taking part in a Qamargah, which is a spectacular hunt whereby the game is driven towards the centre of a ten mile circular area so that the emperor and his entourage could hunt and kill the animals.
It is one of the finest hunting scenes in the V and A Akbarnama paintings and features the early work of the artist Mansur, who became one of the greatest Mughal artists.
The Mughal emperor Akbar is shown in the centre of the painting mounted on horseback with his sword raised. An order was issued that birds and beats should be driven together from near the mountains on the one side, and from the river Bihat (Jilham) on the other.
Several thousand footman from the towns and villages of the Lahoreprovince were appointed to drive the game. A wide space within ten miles of Lahore - like the capacious heart of princes- was chosen for the collecting of the animals.
At the beginning, the hunting ground was ten miles in circumference. But day by day the Qamargah was pushed on and its area lessened. There was pleasure from morning till evening and from evening till morning.
At top right Hamid Bakkari (of Bhakar) had become evilminded and had placed an arrow on his bow and had discharged it against one of the servants of the court.
The royal wrath ordered that he should be capitally punished. Qulij Khan struck him twice with a sword but did not hurt a hair on his head after which it was decided that Hamid’s head would shaved and he would be forced to ride backwards on an ass.
The composition was designed by the Mughal court artist Miskina, who also painted the face of the emperor, and the rest was painted by Sarwan.
The Rajput noble Dhanji got 4 to 5 lashes from Akbar’s whip when he said that he could not report to court on time as he was dressing up.
A young Rajput prince Prithidip, who was playing nearby with his advisers/ attendants with the permission of his uncle, also received lashes from Akbars whip.
Upon Being whipped, the Rajput noble Randhirot, unable to bear this insult to himself at the hands of the Emperor’s servant, repeatedly stabbed himself in his stomach and killed himself before Akbar.
Instead of being shocked by the act, Akbar was further enraged seeing the ‘audacity’ of this Rajput, and ordered the dying Randhirot to be trampled by an elephant, saying - “Kill this bastard!”. All in all, the Qamargah was a true bloodbath of man and beast.